The  European Constitution asd4a
"The European Parliament endorses the Constitutional Treaty and
wholeheartedly supports its ratification"(*): it creates greater clarity as to
the nature and objectives of the Union, gives it greater effectiveness and a
strengthened role in the world, improves democratic accountability and
gives more rights to its citizens.
(*European Parliament resolution of 12 January 2005).
What is the European Constitution?
In order to work well with 25 Members, the European Union needs to be more
effective, more transparent, more democratic. This is why the 25 have decided to
replace the existing Treaties with a Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe,
commonly known as the European Constitution1
.
The European Constitution defines the values, fundamental objectives and spheres of
action of the European Union and puts in place the machinery whereby its institutions
can operate.
In determining the Union’s powers, it also sets the boundaries which it must not
overstep. The Union takes action only when it can achieve the desired objective
more effectively than would be possible at national, regional or local level. This is
known in political jargon as the “subsidiarity” principle.
So the Constitution sets the rules: the players then have to play the game!
Who drew up the Constitution?
A Convention, made up of holders of elected offices at European and national level,
and of representatives of the governments and the European Commission, was held
and produced a draft European Constitution. The 25 adopted this in June 2004 and
signed it in October 2004. In order to enter into force, it will have to be ratified by
the 25 Member States of the European Union. This may happen either by vote in
parliament or by referendum.
What you need to know about the Constitution

1 The Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe comprises 448 articles divided into 4 parts :
1. The fundamental provisions of the Constitution: definition of the European Union, its objectives, its
powers, its institutions and its decision-making procedures.
2. The Charter of Fundamental Rights.
3. The policies and functioning of the Union.
4. The procedures for adoption and revision of the Treaty.
2/7 <
► The Constitution defines the Union as a democratic and open Union of equal
citizens and equal states. It proclaims the Union’s values.
The European Union is founded first and foremost on values. The preamble and the
opening articles of the Constitution set the tone: the Union “draws inspiration from
the cultural, religious and humanist inheritance of Europe" and thus defends universal
values: the rights of the human person, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of
law. It aspires to be “united in diversity” and open to all European States which
respect its values.
It highlights the rights of persons belonging to minorities, pluralism, nondiscrimination,
tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men.
Finally, by invoking “the will of the citizens and States of Europe to build a common
future,” the Constitution clearly affirms that the European Union is both a Union of
citizens and a Union of States (Article 1 of the Constitution).
What is new in the Constitution
Fundamental rights for a fundamental law. The economic foundations are
still essential, but the Constitution places the European citizen at the
forefront.
This is shown by the fact that it incorporates the Charter of Fundamental
Rights which the Member States have already signed, thus giving it binding
force. Specifically, citizens may rely on the European Court of Justice to
ensure that these rights are respected in the carrying out of the Union’s
policies. So the Union will not confine itself to the proclamation of grand
principles!
► ... it confirms and clarifies the Union’s policies…
Internal market without borders, freedom of movement and establishment,
competition, currency, agricultural policy, reducing the development gaps between
regions, the budget…,1
 : these European policies are not substantially changed by the
European Constitution. It sets out the objectives of the various policies. It does not
define their content. It also permits the Member States to lead the way in some
policies without forcing the others to keep up. Finally, it opens the way to a form of
direct democracy.
What is new in the Constitution
The economy, social security, the environment. In terms of economic and

1 The annual budget of the European Union currently represents some 1% of the Union’s Gross Domestic
Product. The Constitution provides that the European Parliament and the Council will adopt this budget
jointly. The annual budgets form part of a financial framework set for a period of several years by the
Council and the Parliament.
3/7
social policy, the Constitution aims at "a highly competitive social market
economy, aiming at full employment and social progress, and a high level of
protection … of the environment".
The countries of the Euro Group (those countries which have the euro as
their currency) may decide by qualified majority (65% of the population,
55% of the Member States in question) on economic policy guidelines
concerning the euro area. As at present, the European Central Bank will be
independent in its conduct of the Union’s monetary policy.
Enhanced Cooperation. The Constitution will allow one third of the Member
States to pursue joint action among themselves, subject to approval by the
European Parliament and the Council: this is known as “enhanced
cooperation”. The others may join them later. Such cooperation is already
possible in the area of defence.
Participatory Democracy. The Constitution provides for regular dialogue
with citizens, associations representing civil society, and the social
partners.
Popular initiative. A million citizens from several Member States may ask
the Commission to propose a law.
► ... it promises freedom, security and justice within the borders of the Union…
Faced with the scourges of organised crime and terrorism, which obviously do not
stop at borders, the European Union is naturally concerned with problems of justice
and policing, which were initially the preserve of the Member States. Hence the
concept of the “area of freedom, security and justice”, which appeared in the
European Union in the 1990s. This area will be established gradually: no identity
checks at internal borders, introduction of a common policy on the right of asylum,
immigration and external border controls, Europol, mutual recognition of court
judgments, etc.…
What is new in the Constitution
Better protection for citizens. The Constitution strengthens the Union’s
capacity to protect itself and its citizens. For example, it envisages the
creation of a European Public Prosecutor’s Office to combat fraud affecting
the Union’s finances. The powers of this Office may be extended to cover
the fight against cross-border serious crime (terrorism, the traffic in human
beings, etc. ...).
As a general rule, the Member States’ veto over matters of justice and
policing is abandoned, and the European Parliament is placed on the same
footing as the Council for the adoption of laws.
► ... it gives Europe a role in the world, and a common Foreign Policy…
4/7 <
Foreign affairs are a sensitive area, close to the hearts of the Member States. At the
same time, the European Union can only play a role in world affairs if it is able to let
its voice be heard.
What is new in the Constitution
A Foreign Minister for the European Union. The Constitution creates the
post of Foreign Minister of the Union, with the job of conducting the
European Union’s fledgling foreign policy – a policy which remains largely
subject to the rule of unanimity. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will also be
concerned with trade relations and development policy.
A defence for Europe. To guarantee peace and security, the Constitution
permits Member States, if they wish, to take joint action (particularly
operational missions) and even to undertake structured cooperation among
themselves. This does not affect the position of the Member States in
relation to NATO.
Another new feature: the Constitution expressly provides that the Member
States must provide one another with aid and assistance in the event of
armed aggression, terrorist attack or natural disaster.
► ... it improves the functioning of an enlarged European Union: The European
Parliament will adopt most European laws, the European Council will have a
full-time presidency, and the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Union
will be created.
The ordinary legislative procedure will look like this: the European Commission
proposes laws, taking account of the European Council’s broad policy guidelines. The
European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, on an equal footing, must reach
agreement on any changes they judge necessary, and then adopt the amended
proposals.
Amendaments to
proposals -
Adoption of laws
Proposals for
legislation
Broad policy
guidelines
European
Council
Eropean
Commission
European
Parliament
Council of
Ministers
European
laws
5/7
What is new in the Constitution
The European Parliament becomes a fully-fledged legislature. In a number
of areas, the European Parliament already adopts laws on an equal footing
with the Council. Under the Constitution, this becomes the rule in 9 cases
out of 10.
There are currently 732 Members of the European Parliament. This number
may rise to 750, but no further. No Member State may have more than 96 or
less than 6 MEPs.
A (full-time) President for the European Council. The European Council,
comprising the Heads of State or Government and the President of the
European Commission, draws up the Union’s broad policy guidelines. At
present its rotating presidency is held every 6 months by a different
country. The Constitution provides that it will appoint a President for a
period of 2½ years, renewable once.
A new system of voting in the Council of Ministers The Council of Ministers,
on which the governments of the Member States are represented, will vote
much less often by unanimity and much more by “qualified majority”. At
present this qualified majority is calculated by means of complicated
weightings. Under the Constitution, a majority will be obtained in most
cases if the votes represent 55% of the Member States and 65% of the
population.
Selection of the Commission President to be linked to the result of the
European elections. On the basis of the broad policy guidelines, the
European Commission proposes laws and ensures they are applied. It
negotiates international agreements.
Every 5 years, the President of the Commission will be elected by the
European Parliament on a proposal from the European Council, taking
account of the results of the European elections. The votes of citizens are
thus doubly important, since it is the Parliament which adopts laws together
with the Council of Ministers, while the Commission proposes them.
The number of Commissioners – currently equal to the number of Member
States – is due to be reduced in 2014 to two-thirds of the number of
Member States. The equality of States in this area will be guaranteed by
means of a rotation system.
The European Court of Justice and citizens’ fundamental rights. The Court
of Justice interprets the law of the European Union and ensures that it is
6/7 <
applied. National courts, European institutions, businesses or individuals
may bring cases before it. One important change: it will ensure that the
fundamental rights incorporated in the Constitution are respected in the
law of the European Union and in the implementation of European policies
by the Member States.
A role for national parliaments. As soon as a European law is proposed,
national parliaments will ensure that it does not overstep the boundaries
set by the Constitution.
Questions
What will happen if there is a problem with ratification?
The Constitution will enter into force on 1 November 2006 if all the Member States
have ratified it. If at that date not all Member States have done so, it will enter into
force shortly (“the first day of the second month”) after the final ratification.
The text of the Constitution itself does not provide for the possibility of one or more
Member States refusing to ratify it. Until all Member States have ratified it, the
former Treaties will continue to apply. However, if by November 2006 four fifths of
Member States have ratified the Constitution but one or more states “have
encountered difficulties in proceeding with ratification”, the “the matter shall be
referred to the European Council” (Declaration annexed to the Constitution).
Problems have arisen with ratification in the past, for example with the ratification of
the Maastricht Treaty by Denmark in 1992, and of the Treaty of Nice in 2001 by
Ireland. Political solutions were found then to prevent the common project from
being abandoned.
What if a Member State violates the fundamental values of the Union?
If a Member State commits a serious breach of the values of the European Union, its
rights may be suspended, after the launching of a procedure which must obtain the
approval of the European Parliament. This is already the case, and the European
Constitution confirms this possibility.
What if a Member State wishes to leave the European Union?
There is often talk about the problems posed by joining the Union, but would it be
possible for a Member State to decide to leave? In the past there was no provision for
this eventuality, but this omission has now been rectified. The State in question
notifies the European Council of its intention. The arrangements for withdrawal are
negotiated and an agreement is concluded by the Council after the approval of the
European Parliament.
How can the Constitution be revised?
7/7
To revise the Constitution, unanimity among the Member States will still be needed,
as has always been the case in the past. What is new is that the European Parliament,
like any government or the European Commission, may also request such revision,
which will in principle be prepared by a new Convention.
